We got a centralized Repository for extensions. Every OntoWiki can browse the available extensions and provides a install mechanism. http://[your-ow.com]/exconf/explorerepo

The repository is available to register new extensions [http://extensions.ontowiki.net here]
As the [http://extensions.ontowiki.net/Help.html short documentation] says there are four steps, which we will explain a bit deeper here.

=== Develop your OntoWiki extension and release it somewhere ===
Develop the source files [Extensions HowTo], test your extensions locally, package into a zip archive, put it on a accessable webserver. We recommend GitHub (you will have the autogenerated zip of the current state there).
=== Create an RDF document which describes your extension ===
"eat your semantic dogfood" - create a [https://github.com/edumbill/doap/wiki DOAP] file (as Turtle, NTriple or RDF/XML). Have a look [https://github.com/AKSW/site.ontowiki/blob/master/doap.n3 here] for an example on what properties are required. For example: 
* name (doap:name - the internal id of the extension. e.g. the folder name), 
* title (rdfs:label - the human readable name, 
* author (doap:maintainer - a URI for the author), 
* description (doap:description - a short abstract of what the extension does), 
* link to the zip (either on the the versions or on the project, use the property http://ns.ontowiki.net/SysOnt/ExtensionConfig/latestZip (is there any better?)) (protip: if you use GitHub, this link can be omitted and the autogenerated zip of the master branch will be used), 
optional: 
* versions (older versions with each a zip), 
* extensions-internal config (look at the example - we came up with a rather complex way to encode multidimensional config arrays)
optional: if you already have a default.ini file you can convert it with the file application/scripts/extensions-ini2n3.php (which takes a extension folder as an argument) (the script is currently only in the feature/semantic-extensions branch). using this script is especially usefull when you have many config options.

=== Publish that description document as Linked Data on the web ===
protip: if you use GitHub, and you use the URL of the DOAP file as the URI of your extension (use that URI within the DOAP file), you will get pseudo-linked-data for free. for example the URI of the "site" extensions is https://github.com/AKSW/site.ontowiki/raw/master/doap.n3#site (notice the "raw", which delivers the file and not a html view on it)
=== Ping this registry to integrate your extension meta data here ===
Either you enter this URI in the form and hit submit or (much more awesome) you "ping" http://extensions.ontowiki.net with a [http://aksw.org/Projects/SemanticPingBack semantic ping]. The Repository will then retrieve your DOAP file and update its index. Your extensions becomes visible to millions of OntoWiki instances within seconds.